Louhos - Community-driven Source Code for Open Data in Finland

With open data on decision-making, governance, economics and other
aspects of society rapidly increasing, there is a clear need for free
and open tools for the exploration and utilization of the new
information resources. In particular, unified analyses environments
are needed that would allow seamless integration of various analytical
tools across different application domains and open data streams from
heterogeneous sources. The current solutions are limited to specific
applications, such as geographical information, economical analyses
and visualization, forming a bottleneck for modularity and
reproducibility of the analyses. Another essential element for
realizing the full potential of the new governmental data resources is
customization to the local needs within each country or region.
Louhos (louhos.github.com) is a community-driven project that aims to
collect a comprehensive code base of source code and tools for open
data in Finland and to make the analytical tools available through a
single, organized entry point. The project hosts a comprehensive R
library soRvi ('turning machine'), which provides programmatic access
to hundreds of Finnish data resources, and seamless integration to
professional data analysis and visualization tools. In addition to
providing data download and preprocessing routines, we develop and
collect analytical tools, and use these tools for new insights into
how the society works, through regular blog posts including
reproducible analyses on local political issues with documented source
code in local language. The project aims to promote government
transparency and received a double award in Private Data opening
category in the national Apps4Finland 2011 competition. We call the
open data community to launch a network of similar initiatives across
the globe, suited for local standards and needs and to share the
efforts, code and fun!


